<!--
.. title: Maitreya
.. slug: 17
.. date: 2022-12-17 22:28:29 UTC+02:00
.. tags: maitreya
.. category: book
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
.. status:
-->

# 0 Glory be to the light of consciousness!

"Gloria a la luz de tu consciencia, [[Lady Burup]]!" 

Y a todas las nuestras.

# 1 Flancia as a Pattern Language

After some investigation I've found Flancia resembles a [[Pattern Language]]. This is its index.

Flancia can also be thought of as a [[Mind Palace]] encoded numerically, with a focus on prime numbers and their composition into compounds.

# 2 Fork

An [[action]]. Fork a thing, a thought, a work of art or a piece of software.

Fork yourself if you want to. You can try to fork yourself into two versions with slightly different sets of beliefs, for example. You do this every time you consider both viewpoints in a debate.

# 3 Merge

As you [[fork]], you can [[merge]]. But I'm getting ahead of myself.

# 4 2,2 Fork, Fork. 

Two things, in succession, or compounded.

A square, as one you draw or one you visualize while you breathe.

Maybe sometimes counting. Optionally factoring, optionally remembering things.

(Breath is the palace of the Buddha.)

# 5 Focus

Whose recursive application leads to Flow (25):

> "As we [[flow]] we'll merge,
> As we [[merge]] we'll fork,
> As we [[fork]] we'll flow."

# 6 2,3 As we fork we'll merge

> "As we flow we'll merge,
> As we merge we'll fork."
>
> "As we fork we'll merge,
> As we merge we'll flow."

In the default number-based memory palace in the Agora of Flancia 2 means [[fork]], 3 means [[merge]]. 2 followed by a 3 make me think of [[flow]], as in [[yoga]], which is why in [[6]] I keep [[Yoga with X]] (the project.)

# 7 Avalokitasvara, or the [[Commons]] of [[Compassion]]

And why we'll be [[monks in space]]:

> As we flow we'll burn,
> As we burn we'll warm and glow.
> 
> Like a rainbow folding,
> Like Maitreya burning."

[[Avalokiteshvara]] is seven syllables, but their mantra has six: [[Om Mani Padme Hum]].

This also contains the [[Commons]] (which should be run with [[Compassion]], and here we explore in the shape of an [[Agora]].)

# 8 2,2,2 The Eightfold Path

The Gautama Buddha found it, and before and after him others.

# 9 3,3 May you be happy!

May you be free from suffering!

# 10 2,5 Right View

# 11 Right Resolve

> "Ay! Quién fuera
> Una flecha derecha
> Volando hacia el corazón de [[Moloch]]."

# 12 2,3,2 Right Speech

# 13 Right Conduct

# 14 2,7 Right Livelihood

# 15 3,5 Right Effort

# 16 2,2,2,2 Right Mindfulness

# 17 Right Concentration, or One Maitreya

# 18 3,3,2 May you be free from suffering!

> "As we fork we'll merge and merge."

# 19 The Revolution

# 20 2,5,2

# 21 3,7 Building bridges

# 22 2,11

# 23 [[Lady Burup]]

# 24 2,3,2,2

# 25 5,5

Focus sequenced, squared, composed; [[Flow]].

# 26 2,13

# 27 3,3,3 May you be happy!

# 28 7,2,2 Four [[Commons]], Four [[Bodhisattvas]]

# 29 Drishti

Where is my [[light]]? Where is my [[focus]]?

# 30 2,5,3 As we fork we'll focus, we'll [[merge]]

# 31 Las Jaras

Idiosyncratic. It happened to me: I found a card lying on the grass in a park, and it answered a question.

Also the highest number you can count up to with one hand if you use binary encoding.

# 32 2,2,2,2,2 

Maybe fork and keep forking, like a [[fork]] reactor (not a bomb).

Fork five times while thinking of your [[focus]].

# 33 3,11

Merge our Right Resolves.

# 34 17,2 [[Dos Maitreyas]]

Fork Maitreya, you get [[Two Maitreyas]].
