<!--
.. title: 2019-03-18
.. slug: 2019-03-18
.. date: 2019-03-18 09:56:22 UTC+01:00
.. tags: diary, ml
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
.. status:
-->

I've reached some ML milestones that I want to write about, not because they are impressive (it's really just basic material) but because I like to think eventually it could be interesting to read back to this date and see what I was up to around this time. 

I finally finished [MLCC][1] "for real"; I had left some exercises (MNIST and embeddings) pending due to a rush to complete it in time for another course that listed it as a prerequisite. I tried going through the exercises without taking shortcuts, and experimenting with enough variations on hyperparameters and reading the code/API documentation, so it took me a few more hours than I thought it would. I enjoyed MLCC but it's nice to be 100% done with it (I'm known for leaving lots of things unfinished).

I also finished listening to [OCDevel's Machine Learning guide][2]. It was one of many resources I got from [Alexis Sanders' ML guide for average humans][4], most of which are still in my to do list. I liked OCDevel's podcast because it gives a high level overview of a lot of concepts, and I found it worked well as both introduction and review (about half of the episodes were about topics I already had studied/read about elsewhere). It also allowed me to relatively easily hit this soft target I have of "ML every day": basically to do *something* related to ML every day, even if it's only five minutes long. I took the same approach two years ago when I started playing the piano, and it's been working for me; I'll never be a good pianist, but honestly I sometimes feel rather good about the kind of pieces I can play today, and just the process of learning has been lots of fun and given me joy. If I can make ML be like this I think I may come to understand at least some slice of the field reasonably well eventually.

Finally, I resumed [Andrew Ng's Coursera course][3]. I had put it on pause around the sixth week (exercises done until the fourth) to focus on other things, but I want to go back and complete this. Once again, I'm not known for being a great finisher overall, but I want to make my ML hobby different in this respect.

[1]: https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/
[2]: http://ocdevel.com/mlg
[3]: https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning
[4]: https://moz.com/blog/learning-machine-learning
